>> As we progress in meditation,
there are less and less useful
techniques that can be provided
because there is less and less
mind activity, less doing.
We come closer to
realizing stillness
or, more accurately, we realize
that primordial awareness that
is beyond stillness and
movement but yet is exactly
stillness and movement.
We realize the stillness within
the movement, the movement
within the stillness.
Another way to say
this is that we
realize the field of
change, the inner energy
to be empty of self or to
be devoid of limitation.
From here on in, I
won't be providing much
in the way of
actual instructions
but rather pointing
out different ways
that the mind is
operating, distorting
your experience of this moment.
Once these mind patterns
become conscious,
they will naturally drop away.
We don't want to add more
to our conditioned mind,
but rather to free the
energy from the limited mind
so that it circulates freely,
rewiring us and growing
the tree of life within,
growing the organs of higher
spiritual perception,
which connect you
to the hidden
aspects of yourself.
Your physical, subtle,
and causal bodies
are like a bridge from
the time-bound world
to the timeless.
Upon awakening, this
entire tree of life
is realized to be empty of self.
Meditation is being
attentive to what
is without judging, labeling,
or having preferences
based on past memories.
It's being present with what
is in a way that is unmediated
by the egoic itself.
If the limited mind moves, it
is due to some dissatisfaction
with what is.
When we make those hidden
mental processes of craving
and aversion conscious,
they drop away
just as shadows disappear
when the light is turned on.
If we don't dispel
these shadows,
there will always be a
veil separating part of me
from my self.
Meditation, Samadhi, is
uncovering and uniting
all parts of yourself.
If parts of you remain
hidden, those parts
run like programs
in the unconscious,
and they remain in
control of your life.
Being present without
attending to thoughts
allows your energy
to be free rather
than trapped in old patterns.
When energy is free,
it moves according
to its own intelligence,
a higher level of mind.
If I continue to tell you how to
meditate or how to be present,
then you'll be paying
attention to my words
rather than what is arising
in your present moment.
Hopefully in
hearing these words,
there will be a dawning
of the truth of realizing
what meditation is.
If I give you a technique, then
you will try to do something,
and that doing will keep the
whirlpool of the mind active.
This is the part of
the practice where
we let go of the technique,
which is simply a thorn
to remove a thorn or
a conditioned pattern
to remove conditioned patterns.
The Zen Master Dogen said that
meditation is the dropping off
of mind and body.
To realize the dropping
off of mind and body,
he gave the
instruction, just sit.
In these meditations,
we are going
to just sit, allowing
all concepts,
all activities of the
mind that may already
be in play to be as they are,
not getting caught in them,
not pushing them away.
This is sometimes called
choiceless awareness.
The body is physically sitting.
The mind is aware
that it is sitting,
experiencing the sitting so
completely that you are inside
of it.
You merge with it.
You become the sitting.
The sitting becomes you.
The meditator and the
meditation become one.
Bring awareness to the
sense of time passing.
Notice if you are
unconsciously holding the idea
that there's a beginning or
end to the meditation practice.
Surrender to the eternal now.
Any concept of time is
simply that, a concept
stored in the mind.
When this moment is unfiltered
by past conditioning,
there is only the now.
There is no psychological time
if we are abiding as awareness.
And yet, there is
no end to time.
All becoming unfolds
within the eternal now.
[GONG SOUNDS]